---
editor_options: 
  markdown: 
    wrap: 72
---

# Bacterial community assessment of drinking water and downstream distribution systems in highland localities of Ecuador Main Code Resources

-   QGIS information
    [link](https://github.com/EcuadorianMP/Drinking-Water-Microbiome/tree/main/QGIS)

-   R Data analysis
    [link](https://github.com/EcuadorianMP/Drinking-Water-Microbiome/tree/main/R)

-   Kronas plots
    [link](https://github.com/EcuadorianMP/Drinking-Water-Microbiome/tree/main/R/plots/Supplmental/Kronas)

## Abstract

Bacterial communities in drinking water provide a gauge to measure
quality and confer insights into public health. In contrast to urban
systems, water treatment in rural areas is not adequately monitored and
could become a health risk. We performed 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing to
analyze the microbiome present in the water treatment plants (WTP) at
two rural agricultural communities, one city, and the downstream water
for human consumption in schools and reservoirs in the Andean highlands
of Ecuador. We tested the effect of water treatment on the diversity and
composition of bacterial communities. A set of physicochemical variables
in the sampled water was evaluated and correlated with the structure of
the observed bacterial communities. Predominant bacteria in the analyzed
communities belonged to Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria. The
Sphingobium genus, a chlorine resistance group, was particularly
abundant. Of health concern in drinking water reservoirs were
Fusobacteriaceae, Lachnospiraceae, and Ruminococcaceae; these families
are associated with human and poultry fecal contamination. We propose
the latter families as relevant biomarkers for establishing local
standards for the monitoring of potable water systems in agricultural
lands in highland Ecuador. Our assessment of bacterial community
composition in water systems in the Ecuadorian highlands provides a
technical background to inform management decisions.
